Chain Complex
DOWNLOAD Mathematica Notebook
Download Wolfram Notebook
A chain complex is a sequence of maps

 ...-->^(partial_(i+1))C_i-->^(partial_i)C_(i-1)-->^(partial_(i-1))..., 	
(1)
where the spaces C_i may be Abelian groups or modules. The maps must satisfy partial_(i-1) degreespartial_i=0. Making the domain implicitly understood, the maps are denoted by partial, called the boundary operator or the differential. Chain complexes are an algebraic tool for computing or defining homology and have a variety of applications. A cochain complex is used in the case of cohomology.

Elements of C_p are called chains. For each p, the kernel of partial_p:C_p->C_(p-1) is called the group of cycles,

 Z_p={c in C_p:partial(c)=0}. 	
(2)
The letter Z is short for the German word for cycle, "Zyklus." The image partial(C_(p+1)) is contained in the group of cycles because partial degreespartial=0. It is called the group of boundaries.

 B_p={c in C_p:( exists  b in C_(p+1):partial(b)=c)}. 	
(3)
The quotients H_p=Z_p/B_p are the homology groups of the chain.

For example, the sequence

 ...-->^(×4)Z/8Z-->^(×4)Z/8Z-->^(×4)..., 	
(4)
where every space is Z/8Z and each map is given by multiplication by 4 is a chain complex. The cycles at each stage are Z_p={0,2,4,6} and the boundaries are B_p={0,4}. So the homology at each stage is the group of two elements Z/2Z. A simpler example is given by a linear transformation alpha:V->W, which can be extended to a chain complex by the zero vector space and the zero map. Then the nontrivial homology groups are Ker(alpha) and W/Im(alpha).

ChainComplex
The terminology of chain complexes comes from the calculation for homology of geometric objects in a topological space, like a manifold. For example, in the figure above, let A and B denote the points, and C and D denote the oriented segments, which are the chains. The boundary of C is B-A, and the boundary of D is A-B.

The group C_1 is the free Abelian group <C,D> and the group C_0 is the free Abelian group <A,B>. The boundary operator is

 partial(nC+mD)=n(B-A)+m(A-B)=(m-n)A+(n-m)B. 	
(5)
The other groups C_p are the trivial group, and the other maps are the zero map. Then Z_1 is generated by C+D and B_1 is the trivial subgroup. So H_1 is the rank one free Abelian group isomorphic to Z. The zero-dimensional case is slightly more interesting. Every element of C_0 has no boundary and so is in Z_0 while the boundaries B_0 are generated by A-B. Hence, H_0=Z_0/B_0 is also isomorphic to Z. Note that the result is not affected by how the circle is cut into pieces, or by how many cuts are used.